README.md, before:

# 🎵 Music Data Explorer

Music Data Explorer is a web application that consumes public music APIs to uncover and visualize interesting and unexpected insights about songs, artists, and albums through interactive charts.

---

## 🚀 Live Demo

👉 [Music Data Explorer](https://music-data-explorer-h232.vercel.app/)

---

## 💡 Core Idea

The project focuses on analyzing **popularity, engagement, and discovery metrics** from public music APIs to uncover meaningful insights about songs, artists, albums, and genres.

### ✨ Features

- 🎶 **Album & Playlist song analysis**  
  Identify the **longest and shortest tracks**, as well as the **most and least popular songs** within an album or playlist.

- 📈 **Popularity and audience metrics**  
  Visualize key metrics such as:
  - Number of plays
  - Number of listeners  

- 🎤 **Artist popularity analysis**  
  Explore an artist’s **most popular tracks**, including:
  - Total plays
  - Monthly listeners

- 🧠 **Artist information via Last.fm**  
  Enrich artist data using Last.fm to display:
  - Artist biography and metadata
  - Complete discography (albums)

- 🎼 **Genre exploration**  
  Discover the **most popular music genres** and explore:
  - Top artists per genre
  - Most popular albums
  - Most popular tracks

---

## 🧰 Tech Stack

### Frontend
![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18-blue?logo=react)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-blue?logo=typescript)
![Vite](https://img.shields.io/badge/Vite-646CFF?logo=vite&logoColor=white)

### Backend
![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-339933?logo=node.js&logoColor=white)
![Express](https://img.shields.io/badge/Express-black?logo=express)
![Spotify](https://img.shields.io/badge/Spotify-1DB954?logo=spotify&logoColor=white)
![Last.fm](https://img.shields.io/badge/Last.fm-D51007?logo=lastdotfm&logoColor=white)

---

## ⚙️ Setup

#### Clone repository
```bash
git clone https://github.com/SimonDiLeoGIT/music-data-explorer.git
```

### Backend

#### Navigate to the server directory
```bash
cd server/
```

#### Environment Variables
```bash
# Copy .env.example file and rename
cp .env.example .env
```

#### Configure the environment variables
```bash
CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=http://localhost:5173
```

#### Spotify API Credentials
1. Create a Spotify Developer App at https://developer.spotify.com/dashboard
2. Copy your Client ID and Client Secret
3. Add the following variables to your .env file:
```bash
SPOTIFY_API_CLIENT_ID=your_client_id
SPOTIFY_API_CLIENT_SECRET=your_client_secret
SPOTIFY_API_REDIRECT_URI=http://localhost:3000
SPOTIFY_API_BASE_URL=https://api.spotify.com/v1
SPOTIFY_API_AUTH_URL=https://accounts.spotify.com/api/token
```

#### Last.fm API Credentials
1. Create a Last.fm API account at https://www.last.fm/api
2. Add the following variables to your .env file:
```bash
LASTFM_API_KEY=your_api_key
LASTFM_API_BASE_URL=https://ws.audioscrobbler.com/2.0
```

#### Install dependencies
```bash
npm install
```

#### Run backend
```bash
node index
```

### Frontend

#### Navigate to the client directory
```bash
cd client/
```

#### Environment Variables
```bash
# Copy .env.example file and rename
cp .env.example .env
```

#### Configure the environment variables
```bash
VITE_SERVER_HOST=localhost
VITE_SERVER_PORT=3000
VITE_SERVER_BASE_URL=http://localhost:3000/api
```

#### Install dependencies
```bash
pnpm install
```

#### Run client
```bash
pnpm run dev
```

### Open the application

Once both backend and frontend are running, open your browser and go to:

👉 http://localhost:5173

Commit message:

Update project description in README
Refine project description to clarify focus on trends in music discovery and consumption.

README.md, after:

# 🎵 Music Data Explorer

Music Data Explorer is a web application that consumes public music APIs to uncover and visualize interesting and unexpected insights about songs, artists, and albums through interactive charts.

---

## 🚀 Live Demo

👉 [Music Data Explorer](https://music-data-explorer-h232.vercel.app/)

---

## 💡 Core Idea

Music Data Explorer analyzes aggregated popularity and engagement metrics from public music APIs to uncover trends in music discovery and consumption.
By comparing artists, albums, playlists, and genres, the application transforms raw platform data into clear, visual insights that highlight how music performs at scale.

### ✨ Features

- 🎶 **Album & Playlist song analysis**  
  Identify the **longest and shortest tracks**, as well as the **most and least popular songs** within an album or playlist.

- 📈 **Popularity and audience metrics**  
  Visualize key metrics such as:
  - Number of plays
  - Number of listeners  

- 🎤 **Artist popularity analysis**  
  Explore an artist’s **most popular tracks**, including:
  - Total plays
  - Monthly listeners

- 🧠 **Artist information via Last.fm**  
  Enrich artist data using Last.fm to display:
  - Artist biography and metadata
  - Complete discography (albums)

- 🎼 **Genre exploration**  
  Discover the **most popular music genres** and explore:
  - Top artists per genre
  - Most popular albums
  - Most popular tracks

---

## 🧰 Tech Stack

### Frontend
![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18-blue?logo=react)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-blue?logo=typescript)
![Vite](https://img.shields.io/badge/Vite-646CFF?logo=vite&logoColor=white)

### Backend
![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-339933?logo=node.js&logoColor=white)
![Express](https://img.shields.io/badge/Express-black?logo=express)
![Spotify](https://img.shields.io/badge/Spotify-1DB954?logo=spotify&logoColor=white)
![Last.fm](https://img.shields.io/badge/Last.fm-D51007?logo=lastdotfm&logoColor=white)

---

## ⚙️ Setup

#### Clone repository
```bash
git clone https://github.com/SimonDiLeoGIT/music-data-explorer.git
```

### Backend

#### Navigate to the server directory
```bash
cd server/
```

#### Environment Variables
```bash
# Copy .env.example file and rename
cp .env.example .env
```

#### Configure the environment variables
```bash
CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=http://localhost:5173
```

#### Spotify API Credentials
1. Create a Spotify Developer App at https://developer.spotify.com/dashboard
2. Copy your Client ID and Client Secret
3. Add the following variables to your .env file:
```bash
SPOTIFY_API_CLIENT_ID=your_client_id
SPOTIFY_API_CLIENT_SECRET=your_client_secret
SPOTIFY_API_REDIRECT_URI=http://localhost:3000
SPOTIFY_API_BASE_URL=https://api.spotify.com/v1
SPOTIFY_API_AUTH_URL=https://accounts.spotify.com/api/token
```

#### Last.fm API Credentials
1. Create a Last.fm API account at https://www.last.fm/api
2. Add the following variables to your .env file:
```bash
LASTFM_API_KEY=your_api_key
LASTFM_API_BASE_URL=https://ws.audioscrobbler.com/2.0
```

#### Install dependencies
```bash
npm install
```

#### Run backend
```bash
node index
```

### Frontend

#### Navigate to the client directory
```bash
cd client/
```

#### Environment Variables
```bash
# Copy .env.example file and rename
cp .env.example .env
```

#### Configure the environment variables
```bash
VITE_SERVER_HOST=localhost
VITE_SERVER_PORT=3000
VITE_SERVER_BASE_URL=http://localhost:3000/api
```

#### Install dependencies
```bash
pnpm install
```

#### Run client
```bash
pnpm run dev
```

### Open the application

Once both backend and frontend are running, open your browser and go to:

👉 http://localhost:5173
